blog/2025-06-30-levels-of-abstraction/index.md, before:

---
slug: levels-of-abstraction
title: "Starthub - the right level of abstraction"
# authors: [tgirotto]
tags: [starthub]
---

The company I currently work for offers a software platform to manage solar mini-grids. From the user's point of view, it consists of an admin panel and a suite of mobile-first web apps that our customers use to manage their solar mini-grids. It is a fairly standard CRUD system: a storage layer (Postgres database + S3 storage), a view layer (Vue web apps) and a business logic layer, consisting of a set of NestJS services (data and financial transaction processing). The schema is also fairly standard: a set of tables to track the state of energy meters, process inbound and outbound commands from and to devices on the field, RBAC and among the others. Yet, it took us about a year to reach a production-grade setup. RLS rules, social login, embedding of a Grafana instance... those are the boring, painful, necessary steps that software teams seem to keep tackling, over and over again. During that year, I often wondered whether there would be faster, simpler ways to get started from a ready-made template instead of rebuilding everything, once again, from scratch. After all, our system was not too different from, say, one of those fleet-tracking systems that are commonly offered in the market, no?

Commit message:

working on articles for blog

blog/2025-06-30-levels-of-abstraction/index.md, after:

---
slug: levels-of-abstraction
title: "Starthub - the right level of abstraction"
# authors: [tgirotto]
tags: [starthub]
---

Over the past weeks I have been spending a non-negligible amount of time working with [Supabase](https://supabase.com/), a platform for backend development that has exploded in popularity in the recent years. Sitting on top of Postgres, Supabase uses classic SQL dumps to dump and restore a database schema. SQL dumps are not just snapshots of a database, but can be seen as a way to package the entire business logic of a company. At the same time, in [one](https://tommaso-girotto.co/blog/an-ikea-for-software) of my past blog posts I explored the idea of a top-to-bottom approach to building software, where an entire system could be deployed with a single command independently of the amount and complexity of its components. The question needs then to be asked: could SQL be the right tool to package entire systems, so they can be exchanged, traded and deployed in a standardised way? And, if not, what would such a tool look like? What would be the best **level of abstraction** to work at?

### Iteration 1: SQL

Takeaways:

* SQL dumps only allow for packaging of the database schema. However, we need a tool that allows for the deployment of cloud architecture and business logic. In other words, we need a more generic, lower-level tool.

### Iteration 2: Infrastructure as Code

The IaC industry already offers well-established tools to spin up entire cloud architectures. For examples, both [Terraform](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform) and its open-source fork, [OpenTofu](https://opentofu.org/) not only can deploy entire cloud architectures, but also offer registries for developers to share modules and recipes.

Takeaways:

* Although a step forward with respect to the first iteration, deploying a cloud system of arbitrary complexity often entails steps of manual configuration. For example, if we wanted to deploy [Chirpstack](https://www.chirpstack.io/) to a VPS and get it to communicate with a backend server of sorts via webhook, we would need to create an API token via the admin panel and paste it into the environment variables of a Nest JS server. It sounds like we need a escape hatch to perform manual configurations when an API is not availble.

### Iteration 3: Docker

Problems:

* Docker seems to enable arbitrary complexity to the problem of packaging. However, Docker images easily take several MB, even to perform the smallest tasks, like, for example, an HTTP call.

### Iteration 4: Docker + WebAssembly

WebAssembly (WASM) seems to be the most interesting
